---
title: Manus Tech Tips
pubDate: "2024-06-19"
author: "Manuel Thomsen"
description: Performance & Control for elevenlabs
tags:
  - Video Dubbing
  - Virtual Avatar
  - Custom Avatars
imgUrl: ./Heygen.png
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
---
June 19
# MANUS TECH TIPS 
# Performance & Control for elevenlabs

One of the hardest things to get right around in synthetic voice overs is the **UNCANNY VALLEY** of generative AI.
A seemingly uncontrollable **black box that does amazing things**, but makes it hard for us humans to bake artistic intent into it.
To that effect, I'll try to help you **manage the randomness and understand** what actually makes the performance of synthetic voice-over tick and add intent.

## 1. Voice selection
**Voice selection** and **voice creation** are the most important aspects of synthetic voices.
This might seem obvious, but voice models are static, meaning they don't change. At least not for now.
So whatever is "baked" into them, will stay there and define the end product and whatever they generate.
**THAT** is something that you can control, and can add intent to your synthetic content.
So whenever you choose a voice, be adamant of testing the voice, the tonality and the quality, as it can vary **DRASTICALLY** especially for non-english languages and accents.


## 2. Voice Creation
Whenever you want to create a voice, make sure to have **proper written consent.**
**Define** the voice you want, even if it's your own voice, and **find references**. Write it down, it doesn't hurt.
**Practice!** first, take breaks, and listen to your recordings. Synthetic voice models are made much the same way as normal voice-over is made.
**AND THE HARDEST PART…**
Have a friend or two join you and give you **brutally honest feedback**. It will hurt at first (especially for the untrained), but the result will thank you, once you have a voice that actually expresses the best and most accurate version of you.

## 3. BUT How do you actually do it?

### First
**Forget Everything you know about grammar.**
Text-to-Voice is **NOT** simple writing. **Elevenlabs** uses the context of what you write as the reference for the **performance**. But that is not always enough…
### Great...
How do you infuse text with **MORE** context then?

### Here's a few techniques
1. **UPPERCASE**
	Writing things in uppercase emphasises specific words that you want to come out stronger.
2. **"QUOTES"**
	Writing things in quotes usually removes emphasis. More often than not, it even reads in a lower tone than uppercase.
3. **COMMAS,**
	Commas are you best friends when it comes to subtle timing adjustments and can also **CHANGE THE CONTEXT** and give you slightly different results.
4. **NEW LINES**
	Splitting long lines into shorter ones can make a huge difference. Again, because we are manipulating how the text is being read.
5. **MORE IS MORE**
	If it doesn't sound how you wanted, make more, change the settings and take whatever works from multiple takes and make them work together. 

---
### Now what?
**Play around and practice**. I suggest taking an old video and create a voice over for it with Elevenlabs' new **Voice Over Studio**. It's awesome and really intuitive.